dr. Hotez how are you sir oh it's great
to see you again Joe oh he's I feel a
lot better seeing you now I feel a lot
better seeing you too especially with
the bowtie as we talked about before
your signature touch yes I was saying
and I try to start wearing a regular tie
for a while it was like when Dylan
started switching to electric
instruments the Newport Folk Festival
and there were just cries of outrage so
I had to
what kind of cries of outrage are you
getting about your bow tie especially in
these trying not a like the bow tie at
the fight the fight the point was I
tried to switch to regular tie for a
wire and they said that there's no way
that can happen yeah that's what I meant
I screwed it up but I meant like what
kind of who's getting upset are you
wearing a regular time to get a life I
think it was venting in a good-natured
way I'm sure so we don't do very many
these Skype ones but because they're odd
so let's I don't know if you've done too
many of these that sometimes people talk
over each other it's it's very strange
yeah I guess it's the it's the epidemic
right otherwise I'd be on a plane and
come to see you in LA and yeah we'll do
that again sometime you know let's let's
get going
so taking it from the top let's let's
discuss give us your take on how we got
here
because this is it's been very strange
obviously the president completely
miscalculated what was going to happen
in the way he was explaining it to the
news he was kind of saying that it was
just a few cases and they'll be gone
and now obviously New York City shut
down the entire country is separated
from each other
everybody is isolating at home give us
your take on how we got here well you
know the truth is we knew this was
coming or something like it we had a
heads up and and and even a even a heads
up before last year because this is now
our third major coronavirus disaster of
the 21st century we had what's called
SAR severe acute respiratory syndrome in
2003 that started in China and caused a
terrible epidemic in Toronto it actually
took the Rolling Stones to do a concert
to bring the economy back to Toronto in
2003 and then it was mayors
virus infection in 2012 and this is the
third one so we actually realized that
corona viruses were going to become a
new thing and we embarked on a big run a
virus vaccine program a decade ago and
and each time they've caused devastating
Hospital epidemics they've affected
healthcare workers so the point is this
unfortunately has become an e normal for
the globe is terrible corona virus
epidemics and we saw this one coming up
in at the end of 2019 in China and I
knew we were in for trouble because
that's what coronaviruses do so you knew
that we were going to be in trouble
because there was no way they can
contain it and keep it in China well the
the difference what this one compared to
the other two was this the other two
SARS and mayor's now we call this new
one SARS too so the Rahsaan than mayors
than SARS too so both SARS one and
mayor's made you so sick and that's such
a high case fatality rate that anybody
who got it was almost immediately
hospitalized and basically out of the
community the the difference with this
one ironically is it as it's pretty
lethal it's about five to ten times more
lethal than regular flu seasonal flu but
also there's a big group of people who
don't get very sick at all
and so you have this sort of perfect mix
where it's not the most lethal infection
we've ever seen it's not the most
transmissible infection we've ever seen
but it's high enough in both categories
that it combines in this very toxic way
so what you have is you have a group of
people who are getting very sick or in
the intensive care unit like older
people those with diabetes and
hypertension even a group of younger
people who are getting it very sick and
then a larger group who are only getting
mildly sick who could still walk around
the community and be out in about and
stores and restaurants and infecting
everybody and so this is what's caused
the problem it's a it's highly
transmissible there's a big group of
people walking around spreading it
and a smaller subset but a big subset
we're getting very sick and even dying
in intensive care unit so that's what's
playing out in New York City right now
for instance do we know why so many
people are asymptomatic we don't we
really don't there's a rough correlation
age so younger people seem to do better
and actually kids seem to do really well
with this infection they don't they
don't get with it with one exception
that I'll tell you about in a minute
most kids don't get very sick at all but
they're helping with the community
spread and and we don't quite know why
also but something that's very important
and one of the reasons why I really
wanted to come on and talk to you about
kovat is we there's this buzz out there
in the community that it's only old
people that are getting sick and dying
and going to I see use but in fact the
Centers for Disease Control came out
with this very chilling document a few
weeks ago showing that about 1/3 of the
very sick people in the hospital are
under the age of 40 or 44 so between 20
and 44 young adults are getting very
sick and that word has not gotten out
adequately because when the fact this
infection first appeared in central
China it was all about older individuals
over the age of 70 those with diabetes
and hypertension and we didn't hear
about the young adults but then for
reasons that we don't understand we saw
this big group in Italy and France Spain
of younger adults and we're seeing that
play out in the US and I know in the
people who you know listen to you and
watch you know it's a big group between
that age of 20 and 44 and they really
need to hear that they're at risk for
severe illness despite what they might
have heard previously well we have a
friend Michael yo who was actually on a
podcast with me the week before he went
to New York he was there that weekend
actually and that's when he got it so he
got kovat 19 in Manhattan and then flew
back got sick and here's what's really
maybe you could help me with this he
said he was feeling terrible and then
took Advil and it got exponentially
worse is that coincidental do you think
I mean there's there's been talks of
avoiding ibuprofen Michaels 45 years old
very healthy very robust guy so when he
was I mean he was in the hospital for a
week and his words were I almost died I
mean he was really really concerned what
what about what about an ibuprofen so
there's been a lot of buzz on the
internet about ibuprofen and then the
World Health Organization came out with
a specific statement saying those are
rumors so there's that a lot of evidence
to say that you get worse with ibuprofen
probably he was just one of those young
adults that's gonna get very sick and
that's what this virus does it has the
ability to get deep into the pulmonary
system in your lungs binds to receptors
on the cells of your lungs and causes a
terrible pneumonia and on top of it you
get a big inflammatory response so it
really can it's a severe pneumonia can
even prevent your ability to breathe and
that's why so many people who are
getting really sick with this virus have
to go on respirators that's exactly what
happened to Michael he got pneumonia so
there's is that there's a rumor that you
shouldn't take ibuprofen but is that
unfounded are you advising people to
take ibuprofen do you think they should
just avoid it just in case and where did
this rumors start from and what what is
the concern the territory and then and
then you've got the problem you know
some people you know also say don't take
aspirin because if this is a respiratory
virus infection there could be a severe
reaction with with aspirin as well so
for now you know and I said the other
thing Joe is anything we say today I
might look like the biggest idiot in the
world tomorrow or next week and that's
because this is a brand-new virus and
we've never seen before right so we're
on a steep learning curve so we're
learning new things about this virus
every day so that's why you know so many
things I'm going to say today by
something like I'm waffling or hedging
it's it's because I am where we're
learning so much that's new about this
virus so it's really important that
everybody be really mindful and pay
attention to real health and
information that from accurate sources
because things move things change as we
learn more about this this is a virus
that we didn't even know existed about
four months ago and we've learned about
an incredible period of time the Chinese
put up a lot of information on these pre
print servers about what the virus is
what the sequence is the genetic code
what the receptor binds to when we had
the original sock that we call this new
one SARS to the Cova night so the but
the diseases called covin 19 the virus
is called SARS - SARS coronavirus - when
we had the original SARS one it took us
over a year to learn all that
information now everything's been
compressed in a few weeks so it's really
extraordinary but there's still so much
so much we're learning right now that
I'm so glad you brought that up because
that is really important for people to
understand people that maybe haven't
looked into the complications that are
involved in trying to recognize
treatments and cures for a virus that it
is it's you you everyone's learning yeah
and also you know and everything we have
known so far about the viruses what
happened in China and it turns out the
Chinese start to have some genetic
differences to Europeans and Americans
and and things can change depending on
it's not just the pathogen it's also
what we call the host the person - so
the fact you know that the virus
affected young adults in Europe and the
US in a way that did not necessarily
occur in China is important and so we
owe or keep we and then who knows what
happens when this virus goes into Latin
America or India or sub-saharan Africa
it may and it's not because the virus is
mutating necessarily it's just that
there's also the host component as well
which is quite important well that's one
of the issues that people are having in
terms of blood type there's there's all
this talk of certain blood types may be
more susceptible to the virus
particularly blood type a yeah well
actually this is actually well known in
the infectious disease literature there
I mean there's a whole I put one up on
Twitter I think a week or so ago there's
you know dozens of different pathogens
but including viruses and bacteria that
behave differently depending on on a
person's blood type so host genetics
influences things quite a bit
now let's talk about Germany because I
found that really fascinating when I was
reading on Germany and their low
mortality rate would what do you
attribute that to is that the health
care they have there or what is that
well let me give you first the opposite
side of the coin and then we'll talk
about your kids to the opposite side of
the clay what's happening in Italy in
Spain 10% mortality so 10% of the people
who are who are being diagnosed with
Kovan 19 have died which is higher than
just about anywhere else I think what's
happened there is when the health system
gets so overwhelmed that so many so that
in other words the transmission goes on
for a long time and you haven't picked
it up and then all of a sudden people
start showing up in the ICU then it's
too late then you start having massive
numbers of people come into the ICU the
hospital can take care of everybody they
can intubate everyone they can't give
everyone the highest quality care
possible is no fault of the doctors and
nurses there are heroes but the the fact
that they're completely overwhelmed with
patients that's when mortality starts to
really rise so we saw this in parts of
Wuhan and we saw this in Italy and that
was the big worry about New York that
the same thing would happen to New York
but I'll hold that thought for a second
in Germany so far we think it's a
combination that has been more younger
people getting it and the fact that the
hospital system was getting ready and
they've got that infrastructure in place
to manage that surge although they're
worried now too that it may start going
up in overwhelming things and then you
look at okay so if that's true what's
the story on the mortality rate in the
United States and interestingly so far
one of the highest has been Orleans and
I think what happened there was they
kept the Mardi Gras open they had lots
of mixing and people a lot large numbers
of people getting infected number one
and overwhelm the health system just
like in it
so there is so in New Orleans right now
the case fatality rate is between four
and five but there's another factor go
on in New Orleans
lots of people living in extreme poverty
and poverty is very linked to diabetes
and hypertension and we know diabetes
and hypertension is a big risk factor
for death so New Orleans is getting hit
twice one because the health systems
getting overwhelmed and second I think
you have a lot of african-americans
living in poverty with underlying
diabetes and hypertension and that's
causing that to skyrocket so you know I
was just on the phone today with the
leadership of Houston and saying you
know you know we have a similar
demographic to New Orleans in many ways
we're sister cities after Katrina kind
of linked at the hip and and you know
there our sister city we love them but
you know we have to recognize that even
though if we can handle the surge with
our Texas Medical Center we still have
that demographic of african-americans
Hispanics with underlying diabetes and
hypertension really worried we're gonna
see high mortality in Texas now is
another factor with Italy and their high
mortality rate smoking because when I
was in Italy I was stunned by how many
people smoked young people old people it
seemed like a large percentage of the
population smoked yeah really glad you
brought that up I should have I should
have remembered to say that so yeah so
in Charlotte so for instance Chinese
older Chinese men at really high
mortality rates and here's something
very interesting smoking actually up
regulates the receptor and the lungs
that the burner spines too so it seems
to make more copies of the receptor for
the virus to bind to so that may worsen
the disease so I think you're right I
think smoking is a factor the one
question that we don't know is what is
vaping do does vais is vaping also doing
that and could that be linked somehow to
the young and all the young adults that
we're seeing in the United States who
are getting hospitalized they actually
don't have higher mortality but they're
still getting very sick and their lives
are being saved because they're being
intubated and put on the vent but is
there a vaping connection again
new question we don't know it's
something that's gonna have to be looked
at
well this there's gonna be a lot to
unravel when all this is over and along
the way people are dealing with a lot of
misinformation which is one of the
reasons one of many reasons why I'm so
thankful for you for coming on the
podcast and and trying to educate us on
this thing what about just that's the
reason I'm going I've been going on in
between word you know we I co-lead a
team with my 20 year science partner dr.
Mary Elena patate see we're trying it
we've developed vaccines including
coronavirus vaccines we're trying to get
those out the door in clinical trials in
between I'm going on Fox News MSNBC and
CNN and that's not an easy needle to
thread either going on Fox News MSNBC
and see and then that's been really
interesting but I love the opportunity
and and I'm doing it because this is
there's a lot of bullshit out there's a
lot of misinformation trying to get
accurate information and also explaining
the science behind it because sometimes
you hear something that doesn't sound
right it sometimes takes a couple of
minutes to explain that and and those
three cable news networks have been
great about giving me some time to to
explain the thinking behind it which
they ordinarily wouldn't do that's great
now let's talk about treatments that are
being considered we know that Z packs
are one of them and chloroquine can you
explain that and and what went horribly
wrong with the couple that took the
wrong kind of chloroquine and turned out
to be a koi pond cleaner okay so let me
let me put give me the framework for
that so it makes some sense when we talk
about all the interventions you have
things that are going to be ready down
the line things are gonna be ready a
little closer and things ready now so
and then and then we can talk about what
I meant all we could let me give you the
framework that I'll to answer your
chloroquine question so the highest bar
there is in terms of financial
investment required in time to show
Safety's a vaccine so that's what that's
what we're doing and other groups are
doing next tier down that's going to be
you know a year 18 months away according
to dr. pouchy
could be
longer than that next here down are what
we call small molecule drugs new drugs
that have never been discovered before
it still takes a while maybe not as high
a bar as vaccine in terms of time the
next tear down is repurposing existing
medicines that we already know are
relatively safe and then showing that
those drugs also work against the corona
virus and that's going to be the
chloroquine category and I'll get to
your question and then the the nearest
ones the one that we could do now is
what's called this convalescent antibody
therapy which I've been pushing very
hard on because I think we can actually
have it going that right now so let's do
the let's do the the chloroquine
hydroxychloroquine this is and that's
one of the repurposed ones that's not
the lowest hanging fruit but the next
lowest hanging fruit this is a medicine
that's used for malaria
it's an anti-malarial drug it's been
around for decades in fact the World
Health Organization was gonna head in
the 1960s proposed an elimination
strategy for malaria to treat everybody
with chloroquine until we had Klerk own
resistance and that derailed that but in
some parts of the world that still works
as an anti-malarial drug it's also used
as an anti-inflammatory drug for the
treatment of lupus and other autoimmune
diseases it you can make a bucket of it
it's cheap
we know the safety profile we know it
can cause arrhythmias in some patient in
other toxicities but it is generally has
a pretty good profile we know that the
drug can block the replication of the
virus and the test tube so in hip it's
the virus in the in what we call in
vitro and the test tube ii we know this
drug reduces inflammation and that's
nice because one of the things you get
with kovin 19 not only get the virus
infection in the lung you got a lot of
inflammation so it checks a couple of
boxes in terms of why it's attractive to
look at it and then the chinese did a
small study and then a colleague of mine
is a fascinating guy
I'm I really appreciate his work as a
scientist if she's a very serious
scientists in Marseille in France named
Didier rah old and he's must have
published at least two or three dozen
papers in the journal that I found it
called plus neglected tropical diseases
a serious scientist works on all sorts
of intracellular bacteria and that kind
of thing tick borne diseases did a small
study showing that it worked in kppen
patients and what he did was he combined
hydroxychloroquine with the z-pak the
zither Meissen drug and found found that
there's an effect the problems was a
very tiny study and so people put those
three things together and all of a
sudden said we've got the miracle cure
I'm not sure that's going to turn out to
be the case I mean we really need to do
large studies the show that it really
works and the reason I'm holding back is
you know nothing to do with doctor
professor all is you know really
important scientists but it's a small
study we were there about a decade ago
with influenza that this
hydroxychloroquine also inhibited the
influenza virus in the test tube but
then it didn't pan out and Clint in
larger clinical studies so I think we
have to be really careful and don't be
too quick to say okay this is this is
going to be it I don't we're not even
close to that yet but we'll know in the
next few weeks because we're working
hard to scale up clinical trials looking
at that medicine now in in terms of
vaccine weight but there is a there is
an there is a new there's something new
though that we can do right now ok I'll
talk to you about so this is something
called convalescent antibody therapy and
it was and it was no it's been known for
over a hundred years and it was really
scaled up during the 1918 influenza
pandemic you know where that terrible
pandemic that killed hundred tens of
millions of people it was shown that if
you took individuals had who had
recovered from the disease who had got
infected they survived
they had antibodies in their blood you
could remove their blood in some cases
giving them back their red cells and
take the plasma
component and used that as a therapy to
treat patients and and in fact during
the 2003 SARS epidemic
the first are SARS one there's been a
number of studies showing that it worked
it actually you could treat patients for
it especially if you gave it early out
in the course of the infection if you
waited too long then it didn't have
nearly the same benefit but you give it
or really on the course of infection it
could prevent more serious infection and
even death because you're actually
giving back antibodies the antibodies
won't last forever but enough to help
you survive the infection so a good
friend and colleague going on for a long
time our Toro Casa de Valle was a
brilliant professor of microbiology at
Johns Hopkins you know started talking
to me about you know Peter maybe we
should be doing this for kovin 19and and
as the number started going up I said I
called him I said look Arturo I'm going
on CNN tomorrow I think this is an
opportunity to tell people about this so
I you know helped amplify what he was
doing he had written a paper with it
with a colleague from Johns Hopkins Lisa
Ann Peron profile I always get her I
always mangle her name preposterous tyne
and I talked to him about this and that
really got things moving along so I've
been trying to use my voice on you know
being on CNN or Fox News and it's not
not just to hear myself talk but to
actually raise specific issues to get
people to care about about certain
things and I and I used it for this
purpose and I think it helped to
mobilize some action and now but our
terminus colleagues are doing together
with the FDA so there's a branch of the
Food and Drug Administration called
Sieber the Center for biologics
Evaluation Research which is this amazed
you may hear a lot of bad things about
the FDA I think the FDA is amazing
myself but Sieber is something very
special all these brilliant scientists
who deal with vaccines and biologic
they're on board with it I've been
talking with Peter Marx dr. Peter marks
is the head of Sieber and he's teamed up
with with arturo to get this network
going at least among 20 academic health
centers so that their identification
soup recovered taking their blood giving
them back the red cells collecting the
plasma so that when people come in sick
they can give treatment and they'll have
some clinical trial results I hope in
the next few weeks but I'm really
optimistic about that one for for saving
lives
the other thing our Toros talked to me
about is you know could use them in
smaller doses to give the antibody to
healthcare workers and to first
responders to pretend them from getting
sick because you're here I mean I don't
know the percentage of our first
responders in New York and that's why
they turned the Empire State Building
into a siren last night and into until
honor all of the all of the first
responders who have gotten sick we knew
this was going to happen
maybe this this could help them so I
think that's going to be really
important as well now the French
government I was reading an article this
morning that they've sanctioned
chloroquine as an official treatment and
that they're having some good results
with that are people currently using
that in the United States are doctors
prescribing that with just a lot of
what's called off-label use meaning that
it's not an improved indication but
they're going ahead and use it and you
know I just I think and and maybe it'll
turn out to be a good treatment but the
evidence is is not strong the there's a
study in Shanghai that suggested it
didn't work so we really need well
controlled trials we really need to pin
down the dose because maybe it's a
dosing thing maybe if you give too high
or too low a dose it's not going to work
how you pair it with the zithromax so
it's going to take a little bit of time
to work out and this is the frustration
that people have you know you're saying
my god we have this terrible pandemic
now we need to get these new therapies
and vaccines out very quickly it's the
hardest thing to do it's the hardest
thing to do is to accelerate new
technologies for a new virus pathogen
that we've never seen before
while the epidemic is raging while the
pandemic is raging it's really we we've
we don't have a lot of track record
doing this we did it once with Ebola
if you
remember in 2014 there was a terrible
Ebola epidemic in West Africa affected
33,000 people 11,000 people died that
was in Guinea Liberia and Sierra Leone
and there were some initial vaccine
trials started by American company that
looked pretty promising they had
licensed the technology from the
Canadians this group in Manitoba a
public health Canada and it looked
promising but as the trials got underway
what happened there was the resiliency
National Response to put in a health
system because turns out Ebola is not
very transmissible you just have to have
some health care infrastructure make
certain that you're not directly
handling the the corpse of someone who's
recently died from from Ebola virus
infection and the and we even sent in
the hundred and first Airborne Division
we said in the Screaming Eagles which
made a big impact on helping to say you
know save West Africa from this
infection so the WHL came in there was
UNICEF there was Doctors Without Borders
lots of I'm firmly army came in Israeli
Defense Force came in a lot of groups
came in to help West Africa and so the
vaccine never really got fully tested
but then five years later when there was
the terrible epidemic and Democratic
Republic of Congo that's when the
vaccine really came into widespread use
and it's probably one of the most
important public health stories never
told which was under conditions of
terrible conflict and war and political
strife and civil civil war they
vaccinated 200,000 people with this
vaccine and it largely help eliminate
Ebola from Democratic Republic of Congo
in that in that during those hostilities
last last year and essentially saved I
think it's helped to stabilize the whole
African continent so it's an amazing
story and again it was this multilateral
effort that involved also
the US government the NIH and Barda and
and all of these organizations
extraordinary story and as a result we
really help stabilize a sub-saharan
Africa but but look at the timeframe
2014 first epidemic to 2019 that's far
that's five years that's a more
realistic timeframe for a vaccine just
to give people a sense of perspective
Peter one of the things that I was
reading about Wuhan is there was an NPR
article recently that was talking about
people testing positive after they had
tested negative where they had tested
negative and then a time period had gone
by and then they had tested positive
again are we learning and we obviously
we're learning about this as a new virus
but is it is it possible that this is
something you can recatch in a short
period of time like within a few months
or do you think that these people had
false negatives we don't know I think
there's a high likelihood that they're
not getting reinfected once they develop
antibodies but we don't know for sure
the problem with respiratory virus
testing is this we even and we and that
turns out even before those three big
pandemic coronavirus I was talking to
you about we've known about corona
viruses for even longer than that
because kids get a lot of upper
respiratory infections with these other
type of corona viruses that rarely cause
serious illness deep in the lungs and
the testing for those viruses is a mess
because number one you're often not
actually culturing the virus you're
doing what's called PCR to look for the
genome of the virus and you don't know
if the virus is really there are just
bits and fragments of destroyed virus
that are testing positive for PCR and we
have all these odd results like kids
with no symptoms at all are testing
positive and then kids with symptoms are
testing positive and negative and it
turns out diagnosing respiratory virus
pathogens is not easy it takes a lot of
time to do the quality control and
really figure out all the testing and
the Gates Foundation has a very
significant respiratory virus pathogens
program which has been looking into this
for a few years now not necessarily for
corona virus or for other respiratory
viruses it's very other respiratory
pathogens it's not as straightforward to
diagnose respiratory infections as it is
as it is safe for things that are in the
blood because a lot of these respiratory
viruses never get actually blood-borne
so you're sampling mucus from the nose
or the or for your washings from the
mouth of the throat just probably
inconsistency in the sampling so it's
really problematic and I think that may
have been partly responsible the delays
this the CDC steep and to work it out
and get it perfect and it just took
longer than they perhaps they expected
Peter is the possible silver lining to
this cloud that this is a wake-up call
for people to really take serious the
funding of vaccines the funding for
pandemic research to make sure that we
never let something like this ever
happen again
well of course we always say that but
then again we said this after SARS in
2003 we said it after h1n1 in 2009 we
said it after mares in 2012 right but
nothing's ever shut down the country
like 2014 right but the point is after
every pandemic you know everyone says oh
now we're gonna put some infrastructure
in place and the truth is there have
things are better now than they were so
after SARS in 2003 they implemented this
set of international health regulations
ihr 2005 and a lot of that was led by a
friend and colleague of mine David
Heyman who's now at the London School of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and with
Chatham House in London and he was I
think he was assistant director-general
of the w-h-o then so that and they put
that in place and a global health
security agenda now we have this thing
called sepi this coalition for epidemic
preparedness innovation so there's no
question things are a little better the
better it's substantially better than
they were but it's still not enough it's
still we don't have the infrastructure
in place we need to rapidly accelerate
vaccines because a lot of the times and
and I get involved in this because I've
been devoted my whole life to developing
vaccines for diseases nobody else will
make vaccines for because there's no
financial return we've been doing this
for
stupid disease vaccines and that's what
we spoke about last time but also we've
had this coronavirus vaccine program and
the problem is the big industry partners
the multinationals sometimes they get
involved in this sometimes they don't
this leaves it to you know smaller
biotechs which are mainly focused on
accelerating their unique technologies
or this handful of nonprofits like ours
at Texas Children's and Baylor College
of Medicine we call our Texas Children's
Center for vaccine development at Baylor
College of Medicine and and it's it's a
fragmented infrastructure and we're
always scrambling for funds I mean even
now when we've got two vaccines we're
ready to move on we're I'm still
spending I don't know how many hours a
day on teleconferences you know with
with potential donors trying to get this
out of clinical trials so it's it's it's
definitely problematic but Peter I think
we'd both agree this is a very different
situation than SARS or Mears or any of
those other things and that the entire
US economy is totally shut down I mean
yeah if anything is gonna be a wake-up
call for industry if anything's gonna be
a wake-up call for people with money
this is going to be yet because this is
devastating for everybody you you would
think so but I'm and I'm hopeful that
things will change but what we'll have
to see I mean so far we've had some good
responses in terms of our vaccine we've
gotten contacts from a few individual
donors so we're in those discussions but
it's still been really tough to to move
it forward even with a crisis going on
like this have we stopped you from
eating fast food because of this because
I know they've had a terrible diet we
were joking around about it well I'll
tell you you know I have an interesting
I have actually lost about six pounds
since it started this epidemic and I
think well one is I'm I've stopped
sleeping right because I'm waking up
doing teleconferences with Asia or
Europe and going to bed with
teleconferences with with Asia trying to
you know figure out how we're going to
do our vaccine and not that we're making
YOUnique faxing us a low-cost one that
would be is not only in the US but but
globally and then all the calls and
everything else and and the one good
thing is that I stopped traveling and I
realized that the travel was really
knocking the crap out of me in turn in
terms of my health so yeah we've talked
about that on the show all the different
comedians that I tour with all the time
we're all at home now for the past month
and like God I feel great it's yeah it's
amazing what an impact it has on your
health to travel all the time
negative impact yeah the travel really
knocked so it's you know we've got a
group of scientist really dedicated even
though the labs are largely closed down
at Baylor and Texas children we got
special permission because they're
working on the kovat vaccine so they're
coming in this amazing dedicated group
of scientists and then I've been
basically you know on teleconferences
all the time I I said to my wife and I
said I feel like I have to press star-6
just to talk to you yeah it's just been
so crazy and then and then doing all the
media hits and I was going to the studio
for a while but now I'm just doing it
from my Skype so I've sort of this weird
subterranean existence right now I mean
the good news you know the think that
people I feel so terrible for those who
you know now we're not getting paychecks
because of this listen and there's so
many people suffering economic hardships
right now you know all the all the
people who used to make my breakfast
sandwich in the morning now I don't see
them they're presumably not getting a
paycheck or or all those things or the
dry cleaners and all that kind of stuff
eels so bad for them because I'm sure
they don't have much of a safety net at
all know what there's never been a time
where it's no one's fault but half the
country's out of work at least yeah you
know yeah it's not it's not like anybody
did anything wrong like you could have
showed up for work every day worked hard
planned ahead done all the things that
you need to do to have a successful
business and all the sudden the carpet
gets pulled out from under you ya know
it's just so heartbreaking we're hearing
so many heartbreaking stories I mean the
the good news is you know the the
in Congress is the one thing there seem
to be collaborating on is getting that
stimulus package out there to people who
need it and I hope I hope there's some
some funds for those people but yes I
hope so too
what's your take on sweet and Sweden's
the way they're handling this which is
essentially they're giving people the
freedom to go to restaurants and bars
and they're shutting some things down
but there are quite a bit more open than
the rest of the world and subsequently
they're they're experiencing a spike in
cases yeah I mean the problem again is
without a vaccine there are other
technologies we have to use go back to
the 14th century that's when quarantine
was invented it was when ships would
come into the harbor on Croatia and
coming from Asia Minor and they were
fearful they're bringing plague and they
kept the ships for 40 days that's the
word where the word quarantine came from
and that's well we've got right now so
we know social distancing is probably
our only hope and and there's a few
pieces of evidence for that I mean it's
real serious social distance he's not
going to restaurants and things so my
colleague Mark lip stitch is a brilliant
epidemiologist at Harvard has been you
know doing a lot of analyses and
modeling and one of the things he's
shown is that when he looks at the
cities in China for instance where they
did social distancing and other
aggressive measures and something that
were pretty aggressively couldn't even
do in the United States but they showed
that the longer you allowed transmission
to go on before you intervene with
social distancing and other things the
worse the surge and the worst the
epidemic and there for us we talked
about in Italy the worse the mortality
so for instance in Wuhan where he
estimates I think I forget the exact
numbers I think he's found about 6 weeks
of transmission going on before you
intervene then it was lights out it was
a massive surge in hospital systems
getting overwhelmed and a lot of health
care workers getting sick and and I want
to come back to that point after we
finished those as opposed to in southern
China and other places in China where
you intervened after a week then you got
you know there was the difference
between having two thousand patients in
your ICU across the city versus 20
that's how the dramatic a difference so
that's a lesson we need to learn for the
u.s. is it's the only thing we have and
to really push hard on the social
distancing and I think it's especially
important in the cities because it looks
to me like what we're seeing so far in
the u.s. is more of an urban / suburban
versus rural divide we're seeing the big
surges and I see patients more in cities
in rural areas although dr. Fadi
Africans last night the other night said
don't ignore the rural areas either
because we don't know what's going to
happen there so social distancing is
absolutely paramount and unfortunately
what's happening because things got so
fucked up with the testing that we've
not we've some unfortunately we've often
found out that transmission is going out
for several weeks only when a lot of ICU
patients started hitting the door so
this is what happened in New Orleans is
what happened is probably happening in
Detroit the mayor of Atlanta just said
you know all of a sudden we found all of
these people show up in the I and the
ICU so that's a another lesson learned
we're really not only doing the the
diagnostic testing but the social
distancing is really important and I've
been on calls with the leadership of
people in Houston because you know
you're right it's it's it it's hurting
the economy in so many ways but you know
if you want to prevent Houston from
replicating the New Orleans experience
I've been saying to the to the mayor and
everyone else in Houston this is
unfortunately what we're going to have
to do and the models are showing that
that's the Oregon Institute in
Washington Seattle Washington called the
Institute for Health metrics and
evaluation and it's they've now been
looking at this they do all these
amazing things to look at the not only
epidemic diseases but also chronic
non-communicable diseases diabetes the
heart disease and mental health issues
but they've been you know all hands on
deck at this kovat epidemic and they've
just put it out on
website it's health data or Gandy go to
the co vid 19 site and what they're
showing is that they anticipate the peak
of this epidemic in the US is going to
hit about the middle of April so we're
not even at the peak yet and so we're
two weeks of this is going to continue
to go up and in some places like in
Texas it's going to be delayed it's
probably going to be around around May
second and I think California was around
there as well so their numbers say it's
going to be the next two months that are
going to be the crunch time when it's
going to start really going up and then
as we move into later in May it'll start
to go down and maybe really bottomed out
by June of course again it's a model
it's a new virus pathogen but what I've
been saying is you know the president
yesterday or the day before said ok I
understand I said Easter now we're gonna
go to April 30th and my point is well
April 30th things are still going to be
peaking in parts of the country let's
use April 30 as a time to reassess and
then make a decision whether we go in
other months let's go a month at a time
for now until we know where this is
heading how long can we go I mean what
if you if let's take economics out of it
what would you think if there was no
concern whatsoever about economic loss
and the damage to the economy what would
you recommend in terms of just from
clearly just purely from a medical
perspective well the problem is from the
medical and public health perspective we
don't really know where this virus is
heading you know it's a freak about dr.
prade she said the virus makes the
decisions we don't make the decision so
although not entirely true because we
can make we can enact an intervention so
hopefully by the summer this is not
going to be a huge problem but what we
don't know and then we also don't know
if this thing's coming back so what did
the out-years look like is this does the
even if it goes down this summer does it
does it come back up again in the fall
does it come back up again early
what's that why would that happen why
would it come back why would it why
would it go away and then come back in
the fall well there's a few things that
are happening one all the social
distancing potentially could interrupt
the transmission we use this number
called a reproductive number which
describes the number of people that get
infected if a single individual has it
so the number right now is between 2 & 4
depending on whose numbers you look at
the idea is you bring that below one by
the social distancing there's also the
question of whether there's seasonality
to the to this virus and again this guy
mark lipstick has done some studies to
show that there there seems the virus
infection doesn't seem to be as severe
in areas that have higher temperatures
and greater humidity it's a bit of a
soft call but maybe there's going to be
some seasonality to this as well and
then and so let's use an example of
another seasonal virus influenza you
know which Peaks of course in the winter
and then goes down in the summer months
it never really disappears but it it
goes down but then in the southern
hemisphere it's the opposite so in the
southern hemisphere peak flu season is
our summer their winter in places like
Australia and then in the tropics it's
about the same all year round so we
don't really understand seasonality
potentially the virus could show it
starts showing a pattern like that and
then the question is does a come back
year after year after year like flu does
or or and have shows some kind of
seasonality these are all scenarios that
that are being looked at so for instance
our vaccine if it's used and goes you
know goes through all the clinical
testing hurdles probably is not going to
be used for this 2020 epidemic if it's
used at all it's going to be used in the
out-years
if this virus starts to come back on a
regular basis is there any other way to
handle this in terms of quarantine or
social distancing like is there would
there would it be possible to quarantine
the people that are at most risk instead
of the general population
well well again the problem gets to the
fact that you know again there's this I
the this is only among older Americans
and people over the age of 70 diabetes
hypertension but now we as the Sinister
disease control has been reporting we've
had this big flux of young adults
getting very sick and in the ICU so what
point do you say pretty much everybody
potentially is at risk then among the
children even though the the children
generally are children adolescents seem
to do pretty well with this virus now we
realize from studies coming out of China
that was published in the journal called
Pediatrics put out by the American
Academy of Pediatrics thought about 10%
of infants are getting very sick with
this virus so infants are at risk so you
start adding it up okay older people
those underlying diabetes hypertension
and younger adults and 40 and 50 year
olds as well and we're hearing all these
stories on CNN and elsewhere about you
know valued colleagues you know in their
50s and that kind of thing getting
really sick or even even dying and then
infants after awhile it's just it's you
can't you can't slice it that fine
that's it becomes impossible to do it is
it one of the things that's come up
about this is people are now aware
people like myself are aware of the the
number of people that die every year in
the United States from the flu which is
staggering it's a lot more than I ever
thought before you know like do you know
the numbers like what would yeah so you
know seasonal flu is really bad it's at
various year-to-year different variants
of the flu so it usually goes between 12
and 50,000 people die of a year of
influenza and the vast majority of those
by the way are not vaccinated so even in
years where there's not a good match
between the flu vaccine and the flu it
could still reduce your likelihood of
hospitalization and death so that's an
important message to get out the numbers
here unfortunately looking worse for a
second how does that how does
work how even if it's not matched up to
this the correct seasonal flu how does
it prevent you from being hospitalized
because it's partially protective so if
you imagine a virus that has all of
these different pieces to it and and the
end and all the antibodies each reacting
to a different piece of the virus and a
perfect match all of the antibodies
target the virus in the in a less than
perfect match only some of the
antibodies target the virus and
therefore it's partially protective and
can you know have a have a partial
effect and so was I gonna say oh so the
it's different and now the numbers of
them of Americans who are dying are all
over the map so if you if you believe
the numbers saying that they're between
four and ten times the number of
Americans and I forget about America
four to ten times covetous ours to virus
that causes clove in nineteen is four to
ten times more lethal than regular flu
so that'll give you the bracket so the
minimum is twelve thousand from flu the
minimum that's going to die from Kovan
nineteen is around fifty thousand and
that the high end times ten could be
between five hundred thousand so that's
where you're hearing those numbers from
the White House press conference saying
maybe a hundred to two hundred thousand
Americans could die I think it's
probably I like the Institute for Health
metrics numbers that just came out they
say eighty four thousand Americans will
die in that peak season going from April
May May and June and then but we don't
know what will happen again
in the out here so the point is a lot of
Americans are going to die
I I'm hoping it doesn't get as high as
200,000 and again the modelers are
really looking at this the way those
numbers that I gave you that estimate
was a sort of simplistic version that
there's much more sophisticated models
but again they're models based on
assumptions over the new virus pathogen
it's hard to get all the assumptions
right but the point is many more people
will die of this virus than even in a
bad flu season I
people are concerned that this is kind
of setting a precedent and that this is
going to be something that we have to do
in the future is there a way to prevent
something like this a full shutdown of
the of the country to happen in the
future
well the way is you know we you know
we've got this incredible scientific
infrastructure in America right the best
research universities and institutes in
the world and and I work at two of them
Baylor College of Medicine and Texas
Children's Hospital and and now I'm
doing a few things with Texas A&M
University and Baylor University as well
and and and Rice and so the the the
answer is this is why we have a and then
I aim for the budget of thirty six
billion dollars annually we need to have
a pipeline of technologies getting ready
for this epidemic we we should have you
know if we had you know all the funding
we needed for our coronavirus vaccine
program we would have had several
current uh virus vaccines and clinical
trials and potentially we could have
combined them in a way to be ready to go
now
so having figuring out a way to support
organizations that don't are that are
looking at vaccines and other
countermeasures not in terms of promise
they can sell that are going to help the
help the health security of the country
I think is really important so one of
the books that I wrote is called Blue
Marble health and it finds this unusual
and we spoke a little bit about this
last time the unusual number of
illnesses from emerging infections like
this one and poverty related neglected
disease is actually in the g20 countries
the g20 economies the 20 wealthiest
economies especially the poor living in
those actually account for most of these
diseases and the problem is the g20
economies are not stepping up to support
these technologies we still rely too
much on the US and the UK and the
European Union we've got to do better
with China and Brazil and some of these
countries to help fund these global
health technologies because that's all
we
otherwise we go again back to the 14th
century in terms of social isolation it
seems one of the critical aspects of
getting through this is having a strong
immune system what what emphasis if any
are you guys putting on developing
techniques or at least educating people
on how to strengthen their immune system
and how to keep their body healthy so
yeah certainly keeping the body healthy
is key right I mean who this one of the
populations that this virus is
devastating are those with hypertension
and underlying heart disease and
actually we're learning this virus
itself not only causes lung disease but
heart disease as well so we could talk
about that but you know keeping your you
know keeping yourself healthy could make
the difference between life or life or
death but even at a healthy individual
with a new virus pathogen and you've
never seen before it takes time to train
the immune system and then it's too late
because the virus has already done
incredible damage to your lung so no
question about it don't smoke don't vape
you know drinking in moderation and and
you know keeping keeping fit you know
avoiding hypertension and diabetes if
you can especially type 2 diabetes he's
not everybody can do it
there's some genetic predisposition to
it but if you can keep your body healthy
that will definitely stack the deck in
your favor I was reading something about
sauna is regular sauna use and viral
infections and the diminished impact of
viral infections on people who regularly
use a sauna because of heat shock
proteins and cytokines are you aware of
anything that goes along for me that's a
new one now as far as yourself like I
joked around about the the fast food
stuff because we joked around about that
last time you were here but have you
altered your approach to food because of
this and Diet I well I have apparently
because I've been so upset and so
anxious to eat that you know I it's just
been I've been on teleconferences and my
wife will actually we set up a little
study here in our and
our bedroom and it's not much but my
wife will just bring me a plate of food
and I'll just you know he did and then
what Evers but I it's not that I've I
can't say that I've been trying to eat
certainly eat a healthier diet be more
careful and my wife spends a lot of time
trying to take care of me but right now
I've just been so upset about what I'm
seeing not only with people suffering in
the hospital but people economically put
out of work and and I'm so worried about
all of these health care providers who
are getting sick that you know I just
don't even want to eat her and I don't
sleep much either I'll wake up you know
4:00 in the morning you know look at the
numbers from the night before and we're
kovat is heading and then I'm on
teleconferences all day trying to figure
out how we accelerate this vaccine and
now it's interesting I've even noticed
that I've become a lot more emotional in
my meetings and you know I'm known as a
pretty even tempered person never
getting upset I've gotten really upset a
few times over the last couple of months
surprising my colleagues and and I think
what's bothering me the most is what I
see happening to the nurses and the docs
and the respiratory therapists they're
just getting so hammered and a lot of
them my former students medical students
and you know I remember you know we have
some medicine yeah something called
match day you know where where if you're
a fourth-year medical student you open
this envelope and figure out and you
learn where you're gonna do your your
residency whether it's an internal
medicine or surgery or your nose and
throat or or no surgery or whatever and
you know a lot of the medical students
would come and see me dr. ho's hey where
should I go do residency and in a lot of
the medicine you know it's great
spending some time in New York you know
I did my MD and my PhD in New York my
wife in New York is a great city great
medical centers Mount Sinai and Columbia
and Cornell and NYU and Einstein it's
fantastic live in the city and I'm
really what the hell did I send him into
there there
with no with inadequate protective
equipment you know scared as hell of
getting getting sick or worse and and
being overwhelmed by patients I think I
said I don't forget what CNN or what
MSNBC or whatever is I felt like I sent
them to hell you know and and feeling a
lot of guilt for being so enthusiastic
about having them go to the hospitals
and your crusty can never know what what
was going to happen but that's been
bothering me as well so this has been a
very emotional time for me
the lack of sleep also has a big impact
on the the immune system yeah really
except your immune system no doubt about
it now with you is it simply just
because of anxiety is it a lack of time
to sleep properly and have you looked
into any sort of meditative practices or
anything that can calm the mind and
allow you to perhaps get a little bit
more sleep which would significantly
probably improve your immune system yeah
no question well I've looked in well one
of the reasons is a practical matter
because I've been doing some evening TV
interviews and and they're great
opportunities because they reach such
large audiences I mean I've been on
everything from Chris Hayes to Tucker
Carlson to Hannity and you know how many
people do that right now going to the
extremes of the political spectrum but
it's a great opportunity but I you know
deliberately try to be on all those
networks the show that I don't give a
shit about the politics this is about
you know saving people's lives and they
will be avoided so I don't want to lose
that opportunity but then I'm getting up
you know early in the morning either for
teleconferences or you know do CNN new
day or or our American newsroom with you
know Sandra Smith and and at Henry and
those these are amazing opportunity ever
get a chance to talk to the country like
that although I you know do a little bit
with Ebola and then with the Zika so and
then to talk about our vaccine and it's
also really important for Americans to
hear about scientists because working
scientists tend to be invisible in this
country and I have a paper that just put
out in the public library science in
PLoS Biology about
how the fact that scientists are
invisible and are enabling for anti
science movements to rise and I think
part I believe part of it on our
scientific profession that were too
quiet so here I have this chance of
trying to take advantage of that but
then I'm in teleconference after
teleconference all day you know trying
to get this vaccine moving so you can't
even take a nap sometimes and then so it
catches catches up to you
so yeah I've got a figure I start to
figure that one out but it's it's
something you're concentrating on yeah
well one of the things he brought up
that I wanted to discuss is the damage
that this virus does to the lungs and to
the heart as well what there's scarring
on people's heart lungs did talk about
that and what if anything can be done to
try to heal those people post infection
well so what happens is you know the
virus gains entry into the deep passages
of the lungs you know the the all the
airway spaces and then it has if you
ever see a cartoon a schematic drawing
of a corona virus it looks like a little
ball with spikes sticking out of it and
those spikes are called the S protein
and actually the vaccine that we're
making interferes with the binding of a
part of that s protein called the
receptor binding domain for binding into
the receptor so it uses those spikes the
tip of the spikes to get entry to bind
to the receptors and in the lung which
is actually an enzyme called
acetylcholinesterase and it gets into
the lung cells so the first thing that
happens is a large amount of virus is
getting into the lungs and that triggers
what's called the innate immune system
meaning your natural first-line body of
defense and it's signals something
called toll-like receptors which cause a
lot of inflammation and so you're seeing
a big inflammatory response to the to
the virus so the two components are a
lot of virus causing direct damage and
then the host or the inflammatory
response and that's one of the reasons
why you know when I heard about
hydroxychloroquine I had some enthusiasm
because it can maybe suppress you know
Nitori component whether it clinically
has the ability to make a difference I
think the jury's still out yet but so
you've got those two things going on the
other thing that's happening besides and
that's causing severe lung disease and
there's all that inflammation and it
causes a condition known as a RDS acute
respiratory distress syndrome where
there's so much inflammation and
scarring that it becomes difficult to
oxygenate the lungs and people go into
shock because of this a RDS syndrome so
that's why a lot of people are dying the
other thing that happens though and we
don't really understand the mechanism
it's been a lot of reports and by the
way you can anybody can download this
there's this fantastic preprint server
called bio archive and med archive it's
fed up by Cold Spring Harbor
laboratories it's and I can check it
every morning it's called bi Oh our XIV
and Med archive is meed our XIV's but if
I Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory so
scientists have been great about sharing
information they're putting all their
stuff up on these preprint servers
they're not peer reviewed yet but just
that we get information into the hands
of the scientist and anybody could look
at them but one of the other things
we're seeing with that is a lot of heart
injury whether people are having heart
attacks because they're intubated in the
ICU and under stress and and they're in
shock so they're not perfusing the heart
or and we know that the old SARS virus
SARS one had the ability to go into the
heart tissue and cause what's called
myocarditis actual infection of the
heart so it's really the heart and lungs
that are getting knocked out there's
also some evidence that the virus can go
into the intestinal tract as well and so
that could actually be a potential route
of transmission mean fecal oral
transmission as well so this is why
people are getting so hammered is this
direct damage from the virus and the
inflammatory component to the heart and
alone
is there any understanding of what if
anything can be done to try to heal
these people post infection particularly
like damage to the lungs yeah I think
you know there are you know there's a
question of whether steroids actually
help or hurt steroids are always a
bag because steroids can suppress
inflammation and help the inflammatory
component but they also suppress the
immune response to the virus
so you could have an increased number of
virus particles potentially so people
are definitely looking into steroids
other anti-inflammatory drugs but you
know those who survive this and
fortunately most do you know you'll find
that there they'll probably tell you
they've been hacking and coughing for a
long time afterwards and a lot of that
is and we see this with flu as well and
other viral pneumonia is it's not
because they're still infected with the
virus it's all that scarring is it takes
the body a long time to remodel all the
scar tissue and and before the coughing
stops so we can anticipate that
happening as well what do we think it's
possible to fully recover from this for
people that do experience these lung
scarring issues yeah I think so
especially for younger people for older
people you know they may have some
permanent pulmonary deficits but we
don't know it's still too early in this
in this epidemic to know is that a big
part of what's going on is that it's
just really too early for so many of
these things the treatments the cures
the dealing with the immune system is
finding out which people are genetically
more predisposed to by time and you know
typically it can take years and years to
figure all of this out and we're all you
know everybody's working overtime trying
to try to make a contribution figure it
figure this out okay the great news is
the the data sharing among scientists
has just been been amazing everyone's
you know putting aside the Ricoh putting
all their stuff up on bio archive med
archiving and the and the major journals
are doing incredible things also
expediting publication of paper so you
know the the flagship journals like New
England Journal of Medicine Lancet JAMA
they're all putting that stuff out
there's fast as they can you know as
ensuring quality and a level of peer
review our plus family journals Public
Library of Science so
so you know if you if you look at the
good stories that are happening around
this definitely the data sharing the the
you know journals not conducting
business as usual recognizing that
they're the stuff that they're
publishing could be life-saving and
responding to a public health crisis I
think that that's been a nice part of
the story I'm hoping so much of what
comes out of this is a wake-up call so
much of the the newfound understanding
and appreciation for the science behind
dealing with these diseases appreciation
of healthcare workers and first
responders I mean if there's any bright
lining to this that's what I'm really
hoping for is that people wake up and
and recognize the good work that people
like you have been doing and also you
know that this is where we live in
strange times and these things can
happen again and we need to be prepared
and we need to put a lot of emphasis and
effort and thought to that as a whole as
a whole society right that's right I
think you know maybe this will help us
reassess some of our values and and you
know appreciate some of the some of the
things that the health care professions
especially are doing and you know you're
seeing people volunteer you know they're
going right you know right into the
belly of the beast you know people you
know who might have subspecialty
practices there set the hell with it I'm
just gonna put on my n95 mask and my PPE
and dive in and help and that's really
moving why have there been such a
shortage of masks and safety equipment
for healthcare workers and how did this
ever happen well we just we didn't get
ready for the surgeon time and I think
you know I think you know I I'm sort of
holding back trying to throw stones at
this this agency or this person or this
group because we don't really know what
happened I think it's going to be really
important that Congress after this and
conduct an investigation not from the
standpoint of prosecuting people or or
calling them out but just say hey what
the hell went wrong here and and
how do we avoid this again I mean the
problems with the testing and not having
all the protective equipment now we're
getting geared up in mobilizing industry
but what could we have done better
especially in that window period when
things were collapsing in wuhan and the
other cities in central China
when we knew this was going to be bad
and we knew this could become you know
one of the great pandemic threats you
know why how could we have better used
those six weeks and in order to get
ready and what didn't we do and and and
now is not the time to do it because
though the last thing you want to do is
start distracting people and worrying
about you know congressional hearings
and and and that sort of thing but when
all this is said and done it has to be
it has to be done the right spirit not
again we have to figure out a way to
stop these partisan lines to say there
was as a country we've got to figure out
the work together that sounds
pollyannish but you know when I was in
you know before I moved to Texas a
decade ago I was chair of microbiology
at George Washington University for for
ten years and I worked with Congress a
lot to get legislation passed around the
collected tropical diseases and it was a
different Washington than I mean I would
go you know to sam Brownback's prayer
breakfast sam Brownback's governor of
kansas before the senator from Kansas
very conservative Republican senator
walk across the hall and go talk to
Senator Leahy's people from Vermont or
sherrod Browns people and you know it's
far far to the left and nobody thought
any twice about that you know we all
knew we ought to go across the aisle to
work together and it's just not
happening anymore nuts and it's tearing
apart our country so I hope the other
thing that we get out of this is
figuring out a way that Republicans
start talking to Democrats again and
Democrats talk to Republicans again and
figure that out as well well Peter I
appreciate your time and I know you're
incredibly busy is there anything else
that you need to say or you think should
be said about this before we wrap this
up yeah I thought we talked a lot I you
know I can't tell you how
coordinate is to use your voice to
amplify you know a straightforward
discussion about about this epidemic I
think you know a year and just by doing
that you're making a huge contribution
because you have incredible bandwidth
and an extraordinary audience I mean I
have to last I can't tell you it last
time I did did talked about your I was
on your show I think was last year
around this time actually you know the
response I got about neglected diseases
of poverty in the US and vaccines and
you have so much is such a powerful show
and powerful guy and you know being able
to use this time to talk about kovat is
19 and in what's ours is and why and how
we deal with pandemic threats it's it's
it's absolutely huge so I'm very
grateful for the opportunity well we're
very very grateful for you Peter and
let's talk again in person during better
times absolutely thank you sir take care
and be safe out there all the best all
right bye-bye
[Music]